The object of the game of MONOPOLY is to become the wealthiest player through buying, renting and selling property.

Equipment in the game of MONOPOLY:

1 game board
2 dice
11 MONOPOLY tokens
32 houses
12 hotels
16 Chance cards
16 Community Chest cards
Title Deed card for each of 22 MONOPOLY properties
$15,140 in MONOPOLY money
Back to Top>
Preparation for the game of MONOPOLY:

Place the MONOPOLY game board on a table and put the Chance and Community Chest cards face-down on their allotted spaces on the game board. Each player chooses one MONOPOLY token to represent him/her on his travels around the game board.

Each player is given $1500 divided as follows: 2 each of $500's, $100's and $50's; 6-$20's; 5 each of $10's, $5's and $1's.

All remaining MONOPOLY money and other MONOPOLY equipment go to the Bank.

The Banker in MONOPOLY:

Select as Banker a player who will also make a good Auctioneer. If the Banker plays in the game, he/she must keep all personal funds separate from those of the Bank. When more than five persons play MONOPOLY, the Banker may elect to act only as Banker and Auctioneer.

The MONOPOLY Bank:

Besides the Bank's money, the MONOPOLY Bank holds the Title Deed cards and houses and hotels prior to purchase and use by the players. The Bank pays salaries and bonuses. It sells and auctions properties and hands out their proper Title Deed cards; it sells houses and hotels to the players and loans money when required on mortgages.

The Bank collects all taxes, fines, loans and interest, and the price of all MONOPOLY properties which it sells and auctions.

The Bank never "goes broke". If the Bank runs out of MONOPOLY money it may issue as much more as may be needed by merely writing on any ordinary paper.

Game Play in MONOPOLY:

Starting with the Banker, each player in turn throws the dice. The player with the highest total starts the play. He places his token on the corner of the game board marked "GO", throws the 2 dice and moves his MONOPOLY token in the direction of the arrow, the number of spaces indicated by the dice. After he has completed his play, the turn to play passes to the left. The MONOPOLY tokens remain on the game board spaces occupied and proceed from that point on the player's next turn. Two or more tokens may rest on the same space at the same time.

According to the space which his token reaches, a player may be entitled to buy real estate or other MONOPOLY properties, -or be obliged to pay rent, pay taxes, draw a Chance or Community Chest card, "Go to Jail", etc.

If a player throws doubles he moves his token as usual the sum of the two dice and is subject to any privileges or penalties pertaining to the space on which he lands. Retaining the dice, he throws again and moves his token as before. If a player throws doubles three times in succession, he moves his token immediately to the space marked "In Jail" (see JAIL).

MONOPOLY Game Board - "Go"

Each time a player's MONOPOLY token lands on or passes over "GO", whether by throw of the dice or by drawing a card, the Banker pays him $200 salary.

However, $200 is paid only once each time around the game board. If a player, passing "GO" on the throw of the dice, lands 2 spaces beyond it on "Community Chest", or 7 spaces beyond it on "Chance", and draws the card "Advance to GO", he collects $200 for passing "GO" the first time and another $200 for reaching it the second time by instructions on the card.

Buying MONOPOLY Property:

Whenever a player lands on an unowned MONOPOLY property he may buy that property from the Bank at its printed price. He receives the Title Deed card showing ownership and places it face-up in front of him.

If he does not wish to buy the MONOPOLY property it is sold at auction by the Banker to the highest bidder. The buyer pays to the Bank the amount of the bid in cash and receives the Title Deed card for that property. Any player, including the one who declined the option of buying it at the printed price, may bid. Bidding may start at any price.

Paying Rent in MONOPOLY:

When a player lands on MONOPOLY property owned by another player the owner collects rent from him in accordance with the list printed on the Title Deed card applying to it.

If the property is mortgaged, no rent can be collected. When a property is mortgaged its Title Deed card is placed face-down in front of the owner.

It is an advantage to hold all the Title Deeds in a color-group (i.e.: Boardwalk and Park Place, - or Connecticut, Vermont and Oriental Avenues) because the owner may then charge double rent for unimproved properties in that color-group. This rule applies to unmortgaged MONOPOLY properties even if another property in that color-group is mortgaged.

It is even more of an advantage to have houses or hotels on properties because rents are much higher than for unimproved properties.

The owner may not collect his rent if he fails to ask for it before the second player following throws the dice.

Chance & Community Chest Cards in MONOPOLY:

When a player lands on either of these spaces on the MONOPOLY game board, he takes the top card from the deck indicated, follows the instructions and returns the card face-down to the bottom of the deck.

The "Get Out of Jail Free" card is held until used and then returned to the bottom of the deck. If the player who draws it does not wish to use it he may sell it, at any time, to another player at a price agreeable to both.

Income Tax Rules in MONOPOLY:

When a player lands on the "Income Tax" space of the MONOPOLY game board, he has two options: he may estimate his tax at $200 and pay the Bank, or he may pay 10% of his total worth to the Bank. His total worth is all his cash on hand, printed prices of mortgaged and unmortgaged MONOPOLY properties and cost price of all buildings he owns.

The player must decide which option he will take before he adds up his total worth.

Going to Jail in the Game of MONOPOLY:

You land in Jail when... (1) your MONOPOLY token lands on the space marked "Go to Jail"; (2) you draw a card marked "Go to Jail"; or (3) you throw doubles three times in succession.

When you are sent to Jail you cannot collect your $200 salary in that move since, regardless of where your token is on the game board, you must move directly into Jail. Your turn ends when you are sent to Jail.

If you are not "sent" to Jail but in the ordinary course of play land on that space of the MONOPOLY game board, you are "Just Visiting," you incur no penalty, and you move ahead in the usual manner on your next turn.

You get out of Jail by... (1) throwing doubles on any of your next three turns; if you succeed in doing this you immediately move forward the number of spaces shown by your doubles throw; even though you had thrown doubles, you do not take another turn; (2) using the "Get Out of Jail Free" card if you have it; (3) purchasing the "Get Out of Jail Free" card from another player and playing it; (4) paying a fine of $50 before you roll the dice on either of your next two turns.

If you do not throw doubles by your third turn, you must pay the $50 fine. You then get out of Jail and immediately move forward the number of spaces shown by your throw.

Even though you are in Jail, you may buy and sell MONOPOLY properties, buy and sell houses and hotels and collect rents.

MONOPOLY Rules on Houses:

When you own all the MONOPOLY properties in a color-group you may buy houses from the Bank and erect them on those properties.

If you buy one house, you may put it on any one of those properties. The next house you buy must be erected on one of the unimproved properties of this or any other complete color-group you may own.

The price you must pay the Bank for each house is shown on your Title Deed card for the MONOPOLY property on which you erect the house.

The owner still collects double rent from an opponent who lands on the unimproved properties of his/her complete color-group.

Following the above rules, you may buy and erect at any time as many houses as your judgment and financial standing will allow. But you must build evenly, i.e., you cannot erect more than one house on any one property of any color-group until you have built one house on every property of that group. You may then begin on the second row of houses, and so on, up to a limit of four houses to a property. For example, you cannot build three houses on one property if you have only one house on another property of that group.

As you build evenly, you must also break down evenly if you sell houses back to the Bank (see SELLING PROPERTY).

MONOPOLY Rules on Hotels:

When a player has four houses on each property of a complete color-group, he/she may buy a hotel from the Bank and erect it on any MONOPOLY property of the color-group. He/she returns the four houses from that property to the Bank and pays the price for the hotel as shown on the Title Deed card. Only one hotel may be erected on any one property.

Building Shortages in MONOPOLY:

When the Bank has no houses to sell, players wishing to build must wait for some player to return or sell his/her houses to the Bank before building. If there are a limited number of houses and hotels available and two or more players wish to buy more than the Bank has, the houses or hotels must be sold at auction to the highest bidder.

Rules of Selling Property in MONOPOLY:

Unimproved MONOPOLY properties, railroads and utilities (but not buildings) may be sold to any player as a private transaction for any amount the owner can get; however, no MONOPOLY property can be sold to another player if buildings are standing on any properties of that color-group. Any buildings so located must be sold back to the Bank before the owner can sell any property of that color-group.

Houses and hotels may be sold back to the Bank at any time for one-half the price paid for them.

All houses on one color-group may be sold at once, or they may be sold one house at a time (one hotel equals five houses), evenly, in reverse of the manner in which they were erected.

Free Parking in the Game of MONOPOLY:

A player who lands on the free parking space of the MONOPOLY game board does not receive any money, property or reward of any kind. This is just a "free" resting place.

Mortgage Rules in the Game of MONOPOLY:

Unimproved MONOPOLY properties can be mortgaged through the Bank at any time. Before an improved property can be mortgaged, all the buildings on all the properties of its color-group must be sold back to the Bank at half price. The mortgage value is printed on each Title Deed card.

No rent can be collected on mortgaged MONOPOLY properties or utilities, but rent can be collected on unmortgaged properties in the same group.

In order to lift the mortgage, the owner must pay the Bank the amount of mortgage plus 10% interest. When all the properties of a color-group are no longer mortgaged, the owner may begin to buy back houses at full price.

The player who mortgages property retains possession of it and no other player may secure it by lifting the mortgage from the Bank. However, the owner may sell this mortgaged property to another player at any agreed price. If you are the new owner, you may lift the mortgage at once if you wish by paying off the mortgage plus 10% interest to the Bank. If the mortgage if not lifted at once, you must pay the Bank 10% interest when you buy the property and if you lift the mortgage later you must pay the Bank an additional 10% interest as well as the amount of the mortgage.

Bankruptcy Rules in the Game of MONOPOLY:

You are declared bankrupt if you owe more than you can pay either to another player or to the Bank. If your debt is to another player, you must turn over to that player all that you have of value and retire from the game. In making this settlement, if you own houses or hotels, you must return these to the Bank in exchange for money to the extent of one-half the amount paid for them; this cash is given to the creditor. If you have mortgaged MONOPOLY property you also turn this property over to your creditor but the new owner must at once pay the Bank the amount of interest on the loan, which is 10% of the value of the property. The new owner who does this may then, at his/her option, pay the principal or hold the MONOPOLY property until some later turn, then lift the mortgage. If he/she holds property in this way until a later turn, he/she must pay the interest again upon lifting the mortgage.

Should you owe the Bank, instead of another player, more than you can pay (because of taxes or penalties) even by selling off buildings and mortgaging property, you must turn over all assets to the Bank. In this case, the Bank immediately sells by auction all property so taken, except buildings. A bankrupt player must immediately retire from the game. The last player left in the game wins the MONOPOLY game.

Miscellaneous Rules of MONOPOLY:

MONOPOLY money can be loaned to a player only by the Bank and then only by mortgaging property. No player may borrow from or lend money to another player.

Rules for a Short Game of MONOPOLY (60 to 90 minutes):

There are three changed rules for this Short Game.

1. During PREPARATION for game play, the Banker shuffles the pack of Title Deed cards, has the player to the left cut them, then deals out two, one at a time, to each player. The players must immediately pay the Bank the printed price of each. Game play then begins as in the regular game of MONOPOLY.

2. In this short game, it is necessary to have only three houses (instead of four) on each lot of a complete color-group before the player may buy a hotel.

Rent for a hotel remains the same as in the regular game of MONOPOLY.

The turn-in value of a hotel is still one-half the purchase price, which in this game is one house fewer than in the regular game of MONOPOLY.

3. END OF GAME. The first player to go bankrupt retires from game play, as in the regular game of MONOPOLY; however, when the second bankruptcy occurs, the game ends. Game play immediately ceases, with the bankrupt player's turning over to his/her creditor all that he/she has of value, including buildings and any other properties. This happens whether the creditor is a rival player or the Bank.

Each remaining player then values his/her property: (1) cash on hand; (2) lots, utilities and railroads owned, at the price printed on the board; (3) any mortgaged property owned, at one-half the price printed on the game board; (4) houses, valued at purchase price; (5) hotels, valued at purchase price including the value of the three houses turned in.

The richest player wins the game!

Another Good Short Game of MONOPOLY:

TIME LIMIT GAME... Before starting, agree upon a definite hour of termination, when the richest player will be declared the winner. Before starting the game, the Banker shuffles and cuts the Title Deed cards and deals two to each player. Players immediately pay the Bank the price of the properties dealt to them.
